Welcome to JW Broadcasting.
Here's what we can look forward to in our program.
What if your courtship reveals problems you didn't expect?
Part three of the Preparing for Marriage Series
will show us how we can calculate the expense when considering marriage.
We go to Australia to meet Viv and Anne Moritz.
Their life of full-time service has taken them around the world.
What advice do they have for those who are deciding what formal sacred service to pursue?
Anne will enjoy a music video that highlights the theme of our program.
It will encourage us to settle differences with our brothers and sisters and to forgive one another.
This is the October 2016 edition of JW Broadcasting.
We begin with a report from Ukraine.
In 2014, political tensions in eastern Ukraine boiled over into a full-blown military conflict.
Within months, over 7,600 witnesses needed to flee the area to seek refuge.
Others sheltered in their homes.
How did our brothers survive physically and spiritually through the fighting?
Relief was organized from hundreds of miles away at the branch office in Levy.
In the following interviews, our brothers and sisters described the love and care they received from the organization and from each other.
It happened, but the hostility started without warning, and the brothers needed to flee quickly.
There was not enough food, there was nothing in the stores, there was lack of medicine, there was no water, no electricity.
It was scary, there was no stability at all, we did not know what to do.
Should we stay or should we leave?
There were triplets, they were seven years old.
As soon as they got into the shelter, they started singing a kingdom song.
The adults also joined them in singing, and because of that, we couldn't hear the explosions that were happening outside.
True, we ran out of foodstuffs, and we had no money, but I knew we would be able to get by. God would not let us die of hunger.
Because the shelling was happening so often, it was impossible to conduct our usual meetings.
We also could organize the ministry in the normal way. It was just too dangerous.
When we received the first reports about the unrest in the east, our branch communicated together and we prayerfully analyzed the situation.
We asked Jehovah for wisdom, how to act, how to help our brothers to be spiritually and physically safe.
We also sending regular updates reports to the governing body.
More than 156 tons of food and 21 tons of clothing donated by local brothers have been distributed to fellow believers and also to saw.
We had been told that we would be receiving about five tons of relief supplies, so we were astounded when instead of five tons, we received 15 tons.
It was lovely to find little notes that our brothers and sisters had written and included in the packages.
Brothers from neighboring cities responded and offered their homes, provided foodstuffs, and more importantly, their brotherly hospitality.
So we are ready to make sacrifices to adjust our schedules and even take time out from our families to run the practical help to our brothers.
For example, beginning at 6 a.m., I would visit the brothers and sisters and bring them the things that they needed.
So, during two and a half months of war and two months of reconstruction, I wrote my bicycle 6,500 kilometers.
The local elders from Slaviansk organized small congregations and regularly conducted meetings to support them spiritually.
Major repairs have been carried out on 20 houses of brothers and sisters, and minor repair work was done on 72 houses and apartments.
We prepared two more programs, this time not only for the congregations in the Warsaw, but for the whole country of Ukraine, even for Russia and Belarus.
We even had 325,000 in attendance.
An interesting experience was the response of the people who were not Jehovah's Witnesses.
They belonged to another religion, yet they said, you are the only ones that really care.
Your genuine love is shown by your deeds. This is what makes us different from all other religions.
They some selfish love, shown by our brothers, did not go unnoticed by my husband and my son.
My husband started studying the Bible, and he regularly attends the meetings now.
Recently, he enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School.
I experienced this love personally, and I started studying the Bible again with the brothers.
Now I am preparing for baptism. Unfortunately, one of our sisters was killed.
I realized that the person can lose everything, but that is really nothing compared to losing your children.
The brothers and sisters listened to us. We cried together. I just can't put it into words.
It is as if Jehovah is holding you in his arms. He doesn't let you fall.
As if he is saying to you, don't let go my dear one. I am helping you. I am supporting you.
With Jehovah, there are no borders between nations.
I could see that this is the true religion.
We continue to pray for our brothers in Ukraine. We are confident of Jehovah's love for them,
and we know he will sustain them through any tribulation.
Our worldwide brotherhood is truly special. When our brothers are in need, we want to help in whatever way possible.
It also brings us great joy to be with our brothers, whether at meetings, in the field service, or on other occasions.
We love our brothers and enjoy spending time with them. At the same time, because we are all imperfect, our love and unity will be tested.
We may have our feelings hurt, or we may hurt the feelings of others.
That brings me to the theme I would like to discuss with you in this month's program,
settling differences brings Jehovah's favor.
It is based on Matthew 614. Let's read this important verse together.
Right after teaching his disciples how to pray, Jesus says in verse 14,
For if you forgive men, their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.
Do what extent do Jesus' words affect how Jehovah views what we do each day and our worship to him?
Consider this. You are concluding your day in prayer. You pray for Jehovah's name to be sanctified.
You pray for his kingdom to come. You ask that he bless the governing body and the brothers taking the lead.
You share with him a few matters of personal concern.
And then you say, Jehovah, I know I'm imperfect and I sinned against you often.
Please forgive me for my sins. Let me stand before you in a clean and approved state.
Now the question is, has Jehovah heard your heart felt request?
Will he forgive you? Well, what did Jesus say?
Look again at verse 14.
For if you forgive men, their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.
Did you notice Jesus' use of the word if? That tells us that forgiveness is not automatic.
It comes with a conditioner price. What price?
According to Jesus, if we forgive others, the condition has been met. The price has been paid.
What will Jehovah do for us? Jesus said he will also forgive you.
Really though, is it fair or reasonable for Jehovah to say to us only if you forgive others than I will also forgive you?
Well, suppose you get very sick and lose your job. You're unable to pay rent for many months.
Your situation is desperate. You have very few of any options. You worry about your wife and your children.
Say you go to the owner of the house and ask if he would give you time to get back on your feet.
Once you get better and are able to work again, you will do everything within your power to pay him what you owe.
He tells you not to worry. He understands your situation. He will cancel your debt.
And you do not have to pay him any rent until your situation improves.
In fact, he'll cover your monthly expenses until you're able to care for your family.
How would you feel about what he has done? And would this affect how you treat others?
Well, because of our sinful nature, we are all in debt to Jehovah, deserving of death.
We are unable to cover our expenses, but when we go to Jehovah in prayer and beg for his help and his great mercy and kindness, he tells us not to worry.
He has given the life of his son to pay our debt. And on the basis of that sacrifice, he is willing to cover our expenses, the sins we commit daily, and to extend forgiveness to us until we are able to get back on our feet when we reach perfection in the New World.
So think again about those simple yet powerful words of Jesus at Matthew 6.14.
For if you forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you.
Is that fair? Is that reasonable? Is it realistic? Without a doubt?
In fact, settling differences or forgiving others freely is one of the best ways to imitate Jehovah's compassionate and merciful nature.
What can help us to settle differences quickly?
The first thing we should do is to try and let love cover over the wrong.
Can I just forgive and forget? If we are able to do so, this is a beautiful way to maintain the congregation's peace and unity.
But if we are struggling to forget the wrong, there are two scriptures that are especially helpful in this matter of settling differences.
They are Matthew 5, 23 and 24, and Matthew 18, 15 through 17.
Keep in mind that these texts are not referring to the same scenarios, nor are they to be applied in the exact same way.
Matthew 5 has a broader application and can be used to bring peace in most situations.
Matthew 18 has a more limited application and applies to specific situations that are more serious in nature.
Now let's consider the first text, Matthew 5, 23, and 24.
If then you are bringing your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you, leave your gift there in front of the altar and go away.
First, make your peace with your brother, and then come back and offer your gift.
To truly capture what these two brief verses mean for you and me today, we have to understand what Jesus words meant in his first century Jewish listeners.
Picture the scene in your mind as we transport ourselves in the city of Jerusalem some 2,000 years ago.
It is during one of the annual festivals. There are tens of thousands of people in the city.
You are there to make your sacrifice a beautiful lamb, the best one you have, its clean and unblemished.
You take the lamb through a series of courts all the way to the court of priests.
It has taken you most of the day to get there.
Now you are ready to put your hands on that animal and offer a prayer for forgiveness and then you remember something.
What?
Verse 23 reads,
If then you are bringing your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you.
Now you think,
My brother does have something against me.
The last time I saw him, he greeted everybody else but me. He was upset. But what is it?
I don't remember doing anything. He is so sensitive. He is always upset with something.
Did Jesus have all of that in mind when he said what he did in verse 23?
No. He did not go into detail about what that something might be.
He doesn't say who is right or wrong.
He doesn't make a comment about whether someone is too sensitive, always getting upset, never satisfied, difficult to get along with.
Why not? Because the reason behind the something is not the important thing.
What is the important thing?
That the peace has been disturbed.
There is a difference that needs to be settled.
A lack of peace between brothers could affect their relationship with Jehovah.
That is important.
So what should be done?
We see the answer in verse 24.
Leave your gift there in front of the altar and go away.
First, make your peace with your brother and then come back and offer your gift.
That animal sacrifice is important too. There is no doubt about that.
It represents worship to Jehovah, like going to the meetings in the Phil service, sharing in family worship.
But according to Jesus, what is more important?
It is settling the difference, making peace with our brother first.
Then we will be in an acceptable position to offer our gift of worship to Jehovah.
Yes, settling differences will bring Jehovah's favor.
But when can we apply the principle of Matthew 5?
Whenever there is a difference to be settled?
Perhaps our brother misunderstood what we said or did.
Or maybe he didn't misunderstand.
Maybe we did give him a valid reason to be hurt.
Regardless, we notice that he has something against us.
In that case, we make peace.
We can also use the principles of this text when we are hurt or have something against our brother.
We can take the initiative ourselves to settle misunderstandings, to resolve differences, and to make peace with our brother.
Again, Jehovah blesses such a spirit.
Now open your Bible to Matthew chapter 18.
We mentioned earlier that it has a more limited application.
How so? Notice verse 15.
Moreover, if your brother commits a sin, go and reveal his fault between you and him along.
If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.
Here Jesus says, if your brother commits a sin,
that is much different than just having something against us.
We are talking about a situation that is much more serious.
What situation?
The revise organized to do Jehovah's will book page 136 explains that it involves financial or property matters,
such as failing to repay a loan or committing fraud.
Or the offense might be slander, which seriously affects some of his reputation.
Of course, there are sins that could be resolved between the individuals concerned,
but are also serious enough to merit expulsion from the congregation if not settled.
Before we start applying Matthew 1815, we should first consider whether it is really necessary to pursue the matter.
Could we simply forgive the individual for what was done or even take the loss if it were a financial matter?
That is a personal decision.
If we decide to pursue the matter, what do we do?
Jesus helps us in verse 15 when he says that we reveal his fault between the two of us alone.
We do not discuss the matter with others, attempting to get them decide with us.
We do not go straight to the elders and try to get them to solve the problem for us.
No, we try to resolve the matter between us.
And since our goal is to settle the difference, maintain our relationship with Jehovah,
and help our brother do the same, we make repeated efforts to speak with him when our initial efforts are unsuccessful.
Keep in mind that Jesus did not say go only once and reveal his fault.
When applying this first step, make it clear that your motive is to gain your brother.
Also, it would be helpful to clearly state that you were applying the first step in settling differences,
as outlined by Jesus at Matthew 1815.
Of course, this would be stated in a kindly, non-threatening manner,
but still in a way to show the seriousness of getting the matter settled.
What if the first step in gaining your brother is unsuccessful?
Notice verse 16 explains step 2.
But if he does not listen, take along with you one or two more, so that on the testimony of two or three witnesses,
every matter may be established.
Yes, we talk with him in the company of one or two more.
Would that be our best friends?
No, the whole purpose is to gain our brother.
Heaming up with two of our best friends could alienate our brother.
Instead, it makes sense that we would choose other mature Christians.
How would mature Christians be helpful?
Well, are we misunderstanding things?
Could they help him to reason about the matter?
Could a solution be found?
Having spiritually mature witnesses there may help to resolve the matter.
Generally, applying steps 1 and 2 will result in gaining your brother in preserving the peace of the congregation.
If he does not respond to these repeated efforts to help him, then what?
You have a decision to make.
Are you willing to forgive your brother, even take a loss if a financial matter is involved?
If you choose to pursue the matter further, listen to Jesus' words recorded at verse 17.
If he does not listen to them, speak to the congregation.
If he does not listen even to the congregation, let him be to you just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector.
At this point, the body of elders representing the congregation will get involved.
They will review the facts of the case and determine if a judicial committee should be appointed.
Happily, though, these situations are rare and matters are often resolved peacefully before reaching such a serious point.
Think back again to that heartfelt prayer to Jehovah.
Has Jehovah heard our sincere requests?
Will he forgive?
Well, at this moment, if you realize there is a difference with your brother that needs to be settled, pray to Jehovah about the matter.
Ask him to help you see beyond the emotion and make peace.
Do not let any more time go by.
Once we have followed the simple steps outlined by Jesus and have forgiven others, the condition has been met.
The price has been paid.
Then what will Jehovah do for us?
Jesus said, he will also forgive us.
As a result, we will gain the peace of mind that comes with a clean conscience, knowing that we have Jehovah's favor in blessing.
We can then make a valuable contribution to the beautiful, united brotherhood that we are privileged to be a part of.
There are more lessons in Matthew chapter 18 that teach us how to maintain peace and unity with our brothers.
Just as important as settling differences, Jesus cautioned against becoming a cause for stumbling.
At a Bethel morning worship, brothers Stephen let describe three ways we can avoid stumbling others.
Now this word picture of someone being stumbled is quite vivid, isn't it?
We've all seen someone stumbled.
In fact, we've all stumbled ourselves at times, and there are varying degrees of consequences.
For example, a person can stumble, quickly recover, and continue almost uneventfully down the path.
Or a person can stumble, fall, break a bone, eventually they recover, but only after extensive therapy.
Then again, a person can stumble, fall, hit his head, never recover, becoming a casualty.
Well, the situation is similar when one is stumbled spiritually.
He can recover quickly, maybe recover over time, or he may never recover, becoming a spiritual casualty.
So we can not know the ultimate outcome for someone who is stumbled, so no wonder we're cautioned to be very careful to never be any cause for stumbling.
Open up to Matthew chapter 18, and here's an especially powerful scripture in this regard.
Matthew 18, verse 6, Jesus says, but whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have faith in me,
it would be better for him to have hung around his neck a millstone that is turned by a donkey and to be sunk in the open sea.
Well, with graphic language, Jesus describes how that if we cause someone to become a spiritual casualty, we could actually bring eternal doom upon ourselves.
But now here's a question, what could we do to cause someone to stumble?
Well interestingly, there are several similarities between causing someone to stumble physically and causing someone to stumble spiritually.
Let us discuss three. Now one, pushing someone could cause them to stumble, especially if they're on uneven terrain, if you think about it.
And this is true physically, spiritually.
But think about Jehovah for a moment, he could push any of us, couldn't he? He could force us to serve him.
He certainly has the power, but he never uses it that way. Instead, he invites, he encourages.
And he explains the blessings, the curses, depending upon how we decide, but it's up to us, isn't it?
For example, Isaiah 48, 18, Jehovah says, if only you would pay attention to my commandments, then your peace would become like a river.
And your righteousness like the waves of the sea. Be seaching, but not forcing.
Now think about it, if Jehovah doesn't force, he doesn't want us to force either, does he?
For example, parents need to be very careful, they don't just simply push their children to serve Jehovah.
But rather, lovingly, besiegingly like Jehovah, try to reach the heart, and of course clearly show them the blessings that will come their way if they do.
Another example, elders, should never try to push Jehovah's sheet.
I heard an experience about an elder during his part, asked the brothers for a show of hands how many were going out in service the next morning.
Well, only a few raised their hand. He proceeded to scold the congregation that more should be going out.
Well, he then unwisely asked for another show of hands.
You guessed it, fewer raised their hand the second time.
Take another example. Those who conduct Bible studies, you're not just trying to push their students to do the right thing.
You've got to quit smoking, you've got to get rid of those idols.
No, not with external pressure, but by motivating their hearts. You motivate your students.
Or take another example. None of us should try to push gourmets, workmates, relatives to accept the truth.
A pushing approach, shoving approach, even though motivated with sincerity has actually resulted in people being stumbled away from the truth for many years.
Makes me think of the story, are they saying that when a person first learns the truth, you should lock them up for about six months to contain or minimize the damage they do.
Well, that saying is totally erroneous. You should lock that brother up. You should follow that brother.
See, that brother has zeal, doesn't it? But it's true. We probably do need to help him to properly channel that zeal.
So that he doesn't try to force his relatives or others to accept the truth that he is so excited about.
Now, what is the second thing we can do to cause someone to stumble, placing an obstacle in their path?
Again, this is true physically or spiritually. And if you think about it, whether we put that stumbling block there intentionally or unintentionally, the results is the same, isn't it?
As mentioned in today's Watchtower comments, wholesome speech and upright conduct can help us to avoid ever being a cause for stumbling.
In contrast, unwholesome speech. Unclean conduct can easily stumble ones inside or outside the congregation. But now, what about in an area where we have a scriptural right to do something?
Now, surely exercising that right, if it stumbles someone, we can't be held accountable for that, can we?
Well, open up to 1 Corinthians chapter 8. And here, very interestingly, this scripture answers that question.
1 Corinthians chapter 8 verse 9. It says, but keep watching that your right to choose does not somehow become a stumbling block to those who are weak.
Isn't that interesting? Even our right to choose if it would stumble someone, we wouldn't exercise that right according to the scripture.
The Apostle Paul, in verse 13 of that same chapter, he said, he wouldn't even eat meat ever again if it stumbled his brother.
Well, like Paul, are we willing to forego our rights regarding, for example, wearing a beard, wearing heavy makeup, using alcohol as just a few examples, if exercising that right might even possibly stumble someone?
But now, what's the third way we could cause someone to stumble?
Failing to warn him about a potential trip hazard, we could call this a sin of omission. And again, it applies physically and spiritually.
As a physical example, let's say we see the floor has just been mocked. And an unsuspecting person is approaching that wet area. Now, will we warn them?
If we don't warn them, they fall hurt themselves. Would we not share some responsibility?
Well, similarly, with spiritual application, Galatians chapter 6 verse 1 tells us that if someone takes a fall step before he's aware of it, what are we supposed to try to do?
Try to readjust such a person, but then it adds in a spirit of my illness. Don't push him. But try to gently, lovingly, warn and readjust that person.
So there we have three areas in which we must be careful we never contribute towards someone being stumble.
We don't push others to serve Jehovah. We strive to never even unintentionally put a stumbling block in their path, for example, by insisting on exercising our personal rights.
And number three, we never fail to lovingly warn one whom we see approaching a potential trip hazard.
Rather than being any cause for stumbling, we want to be a force for good, don't we?
Helping others to stand firm and even helping ones get up if they have fallen.
None of us want to cause our brother to stumble, but it can happen if we're not careful. Why not recall the three ways for the let listed to avoid stumbling others?
You can then examine how you're doing as a parent, an elder, a Bible teacher, or as a fellow worshipper in the congregation.
The effort we make toward unity is always worthwhile. We want only joyful memories of the years spent working side by side with our brothers and sisters.
That's the way Sister Esther Lozano looks back on 73 years of special full-time service.
Well, everybody here calls me honey, but my name is Esther Lozano, and I was born in Fresno, California in 1919.
I was baptized in 1935, and I thoroughly enjoyed my service to Jehovah.
I became a special pioneer, and then they called me to Gilead. I was in the fourth class of Gilead. That was in 1944.
When I left my assignment as a special, I didn't even know how it was to study, but this was beautiful how Gilead prepared us for what was in the future.
Right after Gilead, we went to Brooklyn, Bethel, for two years, Esther Lopez and I. Then I was sent to Mexico.
I came in 1947, and I'm still here, so that makes more than 68 years I've been in Mexico.
When I arrived, there were seven Bethelites, and there were 22 missionaries, and we all lived right at the branch. It was a branch missionary home.
The progress in Mexico really is because of the families being united, and when you get the husband and wife together, then the whole family comes in the truth.
In 1961, Sister Esther Lozano preached to our grandparents. My grandfather first got interested through the book from Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained.
When I placed the book with his wife, and she gave it to him, he decided that that's what he was looking for.
This is well, one cannot be baptized.
Three visits later, a study was started with the entire family.
The oldest son was only 13. He decided that I'm getting baptized too, about a year ago he came and brought me a letter, and told me how happy it was that I had gone to their home and preached to them.
And that was a happy experience of my life.
Today on our family, we are 23 witnesses, spread over four generations, and now my brother and I are serving here at the Central America branch.
Oh, I forgot to talk about my husband. He was the branch who overseer at that time. We were there in the same branch for five years.
We got to know each other, but I didn't pay attention to him because I was always in the service.
And so, but I don't know when he decided, he wanted to get married because I know that wasn't his goal in life.
And so I wrote Brother Noran told him if he was surprised to hear that we were going to be married, and he did write me back and also said,
Well, this is what he said in the letter. You're always jolly and talkative when I'm around.
On the other hand, Brother Lozano is so quiet. I must say it is an interesting combination. Both of you together can serve him and aid one another in your true worship.
This is one of my greatest treasures is having that letter from Brother Noran.
And when Rudy died, I didn't dwell on that. I remembered. I made my dedication to Jehovah and I know that he would want me to put that first in my life.
So I did not really suffer that much about his death because I became even more involved in pseudo-cratic activities.
I'm in the correspondence, but I'm at work about an hour and a half in the morning and an hour and a half in the afternoon.
And the rest of the time, I'm studying here in the room. I'm so pleased that I'm still able to go to the morning text and half part in the service.
I have two studies that I conduct every week. It's such a pleasure to meet with people that have dedicated their lives to Jehovah.
And that totally makes me happy because I know Jehovah and Calvin is his precious son's and daughters.
I don't know why, but many of the missionaries have come up to me and told me that I've been in encouragement to them.
And really, they are the ones that encourage me. It's because I had such beautiful examples to follow in all these years.
And all I can say to you is that thanks to Jehovah for this great privilege of serving him.
Sister Lozano is a beautiful example of sticking to your assignment and building close bonds of friendship.
Did you notice another blessing she enjoyed? It was finding a marriage mate who shared her goals for full-time service.
Of course, not every courtship leads to marriage. If you're dating, can you look past your emotions to honestly see the differences and flaws in your potential mate?
Can you accept these? Or are they serious enough for you to end your courtship?
That's a situation depicted in the third and final part of the series, preparing for marriage.
Well, the big day finally arrived. After all those months of preparation, it was just as I imagined. Or wait, that's not me.
As I watched my sister get married that day.
I couldn't help but think about my own future. When I began dating Shane, everything was perfect.
We spent a lot of time talking on the phone. Everything just naturally seemed to click. I was convinced. He was the one.
But over time, I started to notice some things. I was starting to see patterns. They didn't seem to be getting better.
I wasn't even sure our goals were the same anymore. I felt alone. But thankfully, I wasn't.
My mum kindly asked how things were going. So, I told her. Maybe he's not the one I told her.
I thought she was going to tell me which way I should go. But she didn't.
Instead, she reassured me that if he wasn't the one, I was going to be okay. They reminded me about what Jesus said when building a tower.
For example, who of you wanting to build a tower does not first sit down and calculate the expense to see if he has enough to complete it.
I realised that I was about to enter into a building project of my own, my relationship with Shane. And I too needed to calculate the expense before I commit to it.
They encouraged me to talk to Shane and tell him about the things that were concerning me. So, I did. And my mum was right. I was okay. More than okay, really.
Shane and I decided it was best to break off the relationship. And some years later, I found someone that loved Jehovah as much as I do. And I love him with my whole heart.
Our sister wisely compared her relationship to a building project. She calculated the expense of any traits she saw during their courtship well before they could become problems in a marriage.
Of course, we shouldn't expect perfection from our mate. But working through matters during courtship is another opportunity that Jehovah provides to settle differences in peace.
There's something common to every successful marriage between two Christians. It is their putting Jehovah first and supporting each other's personal dedication to God.
This is certainly true with Viv and Ann Moritz serving in the Australasia branch. They've been married for 65 years and have a combined 131 years and full-time service.
Listen to their advice for younger ones deciding what to do in Jehovah's organization.
I started pioneering in November, 1948. That's a while ago now. And that's what I thought I would do. Pioneer. So I said, well, Jehovah, if I do what you ask me, I accept whatever assignment you give me. And I'll just go where you send me. And I won't seek an assignment, but I won't refuse one.
That's all I intended to do as far as I knew. But then I'd only been pioneering about a year when I got this envelope.
And I let her say, please fill in in close four. It was an application for Bethel. And I thought, goodness, I didn't think of Bethel. I told Jehovah I'd go where he sent me. So, don't argue, just do it.
I was working in the printer, cleaning out old ink tins and making schedules for printing and so on. And then I got to work on a press too.
But I wasn't there very long when they moved me to the office. Will you learn a lot in Bethel?
You learn how to live with your brothers, which you're not used to. You learn about Jehovah's organization. You see how it operates.
I had the privilege of working alongside brothers who had lots of experience. I got assigned to a Metropolitan Congregation. That's where Anne was.
Then we got married in October 1951. And two weeks later, I started pioneering. I was 20 at that time when we started circuit work.
And I'd only pioneered for years. Of course, I was very worried and scared about having to witness with the system.
The pioneered for years. And some of them even have been anointed. I cried half-way to Melbourne.
I'm very close to the brothers and sisters, especially to the children, so we really loved that.
And then we got the opportunity to go to Golden New York, Dean's National Convention in 1958.
When the society found out we were going, they sent us an application for Gillie. And we thought, oh my goodness, how can we do that?
So we said, well, we don't say no.
After 58 convention, we were assigned to special pioneer in Canada for six months.
Brother North said we were in cold storage. That 40 hours from British Commonwealth countries.
So that was a good experience too. We saw Winter for the first time. I did anyway.
And we took pictures of snow and ice and icicles to show. And our son met them and we got it to India or Africa or somewhere.
And Jehovah has a sense of humor, a sense of feelings.
Well, the schooling you get from Gillie or the other schools helps you to see Jehovah's organization and how it works.
We didn't know a lot about Finland, except that we knew it was cold and clean.
And a long way from Australia.
Being so far from Australia, we didn't, we knew that we wouldn't be able to get home to see our families not for a long, long time.
When we moved into Finland, the brothers in Russia and those countries were under ban.
They needed spiritual food and so it had to be supplied to them.
So we used to send people in the tourists and they would meet the brothers they had delivered the food to them.
Without Jehovah's blessing and his spirit, we couldn't have done this tool.
It's amazing to think that the amount of spiritual food that got in there, they translated it and they made it available.
And we did that for over 20 years without any mishaps. It couldn't happen without Jehovah's blessing.
Leaving Finland was not easy, of course. We had mixed feelings.
But actually, I saw Jehovah's hand in the assignment because we really got back to Australia to time when my parents were needing help.
So we didn't have to leave Bethel or full time service to give that help.
We were asked to go to Russia in 1999 and then turned out to be two and a half years.
I was a little apprehensive about going to Russia, but it was really one of the most memorable assignments we've ever had.
In Russia, the brothers were not used to house the housework because of all the years under ban.
And that was quite different because you go to the door. You can't just strike up a conversation.
The person wants to know why you were there.
And you can't make a return visit on someone you met on the street when you don't know where he lives.
Of course, he's how she do and you can make a return visit.
The brothers saw the advantage of that.
But they had to learn. It was a new thing.
Circuit overseers had to learn how to visit congregations in Polish.
Brothers came in and helped a lot with that.
They did circuit work, but they too had to learn.
So it was a big change for them to come from working under ban all their lives to now working the way the rest of the world does.
The best decision I ever made was to lose my life in Jehovah's hands.
And to say, you decide where I go and what I do.
I've had the feeling all along and it's proven true so far that everything I have done has been training for something else.
So what I'm doing now is still training.
It must be for the new world because I haven't got much time left in this one.
What will it be? Well, who knows.
To my recommendation to everyone is don't decide to yourself.
Let Jehovah do it.
Brother and sister Maritz always looked at Jehovah for their assignments.
For Brother Maritz, that's meant serving on the branch committees in Finland, India, Russia, Poland, Ukraine and Australia.
And the privilege of making visits to more than 70 countries as a representative of World Headquarters.
We can certainly pursue any form of service that our circumstances allow.
But when we pray for Jehovah's direction, we rely on him to send us where it benefits his organization and ourselves the most.
The willing spirit to do Jehovah's will is shared by Bethelites who have received new assignments in the field.
Adjustments in the work at Bethel have put greater emphasis on the preaching work.
More resources, including experienced Bible teachers, are being directed to the busy harvest.
In this report from the South Africa branch, we hear from loyal ones who are supporting theocratic direction.
On September 23, 2015, it was announced at all branches that the governing body was requesting all Bethel families to reduce in size.
For me personally, when they made that announcement on the Wednesday of September 23, it was exciting.
I knew it was momentous.
When the announcement was made, it was all up in my eyes because I realized how close we are to the end.
And I remember just closing my eyes and saying to Jehovah, whatever you want will do.
When I received news of my assignment, initially I was numb.
When I got news about my assignment, I was so scared in the beginning.
Caught me off guard. I wasn't expecting it.
We were quite shocked and sad, but we were encouraged by the brothers at Bethel and also in the congregation.
The direction from the governing body was where being reassigned as regular pioneers, we signed the forms for pioneering.
That very Thursday.
For me, I've always appreciated the scripture for Samuel 1222, where it states here for the sake of his great name, Jehovah, not abandon his people.
I don't want to forget my Bethel time because it was lovely, but I want to stretch forward ahead to pioneering and really enjoy it.
We pray specifically for a place that is going to help us to be as simple as possible so that we can forecast our attention to the ministry.
All that I'd love to say to everyone who has been reassigned is that Jehovah is our father and will never relinquish his responsibility as a father.
He will take care of us.
We are losing four couples from our congregation and I would like to tell the congregation where they have been assigned to,
that they are getting real spiritual people and that they are really going to be an asset to that congregation.
I just want to also think the brothers in the congregation will be going to because they organize secular work for us and also as Borneo mentioned our accommodation.
So they made it easy for us to look forward to our assignment.
But we know this of course comes from Jehovah.
And so the bronze committee said, well, we have to move quickly with this.
We asked the family, please give us two, three weeks to work things out and that is what they appreciated.
Congregations, funding, the satellites were offered jobs, they were offered accommodation.
Our congregation is delighted.
Having two young satellites coming in general, our congregation has quite a number of young people.
We can already see that it's going to benefit them quite a lot.
We've actually assisted them in getting a place where they could stay and also assisted them to settle in and be part of the congregation.
Welcome to our new home, we've been here a little over week now.
The brothers helped to paint their house, to put tiles on, to clean the entire place.
So they really did a lot of work in our behalf.
Also memories of our friends from people.
It was about six months ago when we enjoyed Pioneer School.
Thanks to our brothers, we were able to find employment.
Jehovah has been answering our prayers and sometimes he's been answering our concerns even before we even pray about it.
No doubt these extraordinary experiences in South Africa are mirrored all over the world.
The love we show to each other is a reflection of Jehovah's great love for each of us.
And we thank him to be part of this amazing brother.
The governing body deeply appreciates the brotherhood's loyal response to theocratic direction.
Change is not always easy, but it helps when we look at Jehovah's blessing on new spiritual provisions and adjustments to the work.
Letters of appreciation from our brothers add to the governing body's confidence that Jehovah is directing his organization.
A sister from the United States wrote this about JW Broadcasting.
Often the programming seems like a direct answer to a prayer.
After a particularly difficult day, she added,
what did I find today at home for me like a present from Jehovah?
The March 2016 broadcast dealing with discouragement.
After watching the January 2016 broadcast, a family from Austria wrote,
our eldest son is serving in the branch in Salter's Germany.
We are very proud of him, but we terribly miss him.
So we love the new song, I give you my best.
It's heartwarming that you know our feelings and value our offers.
Jehovah is certainly giving us what we need, when we need it, and it comes to us in such variety.
This next music video, for example, fits well with our discussion on settling differences.
It begins with a situation between a young mother and her mother-in-law,
and reminds us to forgive one another.
Yes, you had the best of an angel.
Let's be sure we both see eye to eye to sight.
Please let's forgive mothers today.
Brothers will stay.
Did you see two critical areas where we need to be forgiving?
It was in the family and in the congregation.
We'll always have reasons in this imperfect world or forgive.
Look for the opportunities in your life to imitate Jehovah and forgive others.
As we conclude our program, we take you on a visit to World Headquarters and Warwick, New York.
The Bethel family has been moving into their new work areas.
More than 25,000 brothers and sisters worked on the construction of the facility.
It was a united effort by temporary volunteers, construction servants,
Bethelites, construction groups, and volunteers who previously worked on Kingdom Hall projects.
Earlier this year, workers were making final preparations for the arrival of World Headquarters staff.
When open for tours, visitors will enjoy the historic Bible display,
a visual history exhibited Jehovah's Witnesses,
and an interactive museum explaining how Jehovah directs his organization today.
We thank Jehovah for all who helped to complete the new World Headquarters.
That includes the thousands of volunteers,
but also the millions of your dear brothers and sisters who support the worldwide work with your regular donations.
We send you our love and pray for Jehovah to bless our united brotherhood.
From Brooklyn, New York, this is JW Broadcasting.